---
title: SaaSS: How to Openly Steal From Your Customers 
author: Michael Bassili
layout: post
tags: Programming
category: Blog
---

### Ever Try To Buy A Service?

Services as a Software Substitute (SaaSS) has been on my mind as of late. It started when I noticed that all the applications I trended towards using were hosted somewhere else, ran by someone else, away from my grubby hands. This doesn’t intrinsically bother me—it is noticeably more convenient to just access an app that’s someplace else without the need to install a new program on my personal machine. Where I started feeling weird is when I started writing my todo list application [Collect](https://github.com/FlatlanderWoman/collect). I was faced with the decision as to (1) where I’d host the application, and (2) how much I’d charge to access it. Pretty standard stuff, except that I tend to move between projects the same way a pigeon moves between pieces of food on the pavement. I wasn’t going to around long enough to host this bad boy myself (at least, not for long). What would happen to my users? Where would they go? How could they use the product they bought from me? Was it even a product at that point? And then I thought back to how I’ve been trending towards SaaSS solutions recently and I kind of freaked myself out. I was seriously considering charging for a product that (1) the purchaser would never hold in their hands/hard-drives, (2) the users would have no guarantee that their product could be accessed after purchase, and (3) keeping my code secret so that I could be the only boy in all the land who could make money off of it. Since you’re reading this, you can probably realize that this bothered me enough for me to make a change.

### A Fundamentally Shitty Practice

My biggest issue with SaaSS is that I don’t actually own what I bought. Todoist, the todo list I’ve been using for over three years now, is not mine. I pay a subscription fee for it. That’s fine. Darkspore, a game I paid upfront for, is now literally unplayable. The product I paid for and considered “mine” was never actually mine. EA might be okay with this, but I sure as hell am not. If I buy something, I want a relatively okay chance of being able to use the thing years down the line. SaaSS prevents this from even being a consideration. Another issue I have is that I can’t modify the thing I bought. I’m big into modding (I mean I’m sure there are more people out there who are way more invested in modding than I am) and I was taken aback when the Microsoft Store was trying to sell me Shadow Of The Tomb Raider for like $60 without mod support. In fact, there was no way at the time to even alter the executable in the most trivial ways (e.g. permissions, rename the exe). Last I checked, I needed to be online and logged in to play a game on the MS store. I was paying for a service but they were treating it like a good. It was not a good. This was corporate bullshit, and not the secret, obtuse kind. This bullshit was out in the open, obvious. And people bought it! And in 20+ years when the servers shut down and they can’t access the game they bought for $60, they’ll be stuck. Furthermore, “streaming” or “accessing” or “DRMlocking” games like this prevents the preservation of that piece of art. It’s not obvious to me why people keep buying into this stuff! The most recent SimCity game released always-online and people were slack-jawed that they couldn’t play their game when the servers went down in the first week. What did you think was going to happen? What does “always-online” mean to some people? I’d like to know. 

### I Want To Own The Things I Buy

In summary, I don’t like SaaSS. As of today, I’ve opened up the code to [the app I’ve been writing](https://github.com/FlatlanderWoman/collect) to the public. I’ve updated the licence in order to allow for open contribution and interaction with the software. I’ll add an option for donations once the application is actually completed, but for now, this scratches that itch I’ve been having for a while. I’m no longer buying games that are always-online, or have some DRM that needs an internet connection to activate, or straight-up services. I won’t be buying a Google Stadia. I won’t consciously buy into this crazy dystopia where nobody owns the software they buy.
